Data mining, the extraction of hidden predictive information from 
large databases, is a powerful new technology with great potential 
to help companies focus on the most important information in their 
data warehouses. Data mining tools predict future trends and 
behaviors, allowing businesses to make proactive, knowledge-driven 
decisions. The automated, prospective analyses offered by data 
mining move beyond the analyses of past events provided by 
retrospective tools typical of decision support systems. Data 
mining tools can answer business questions that traditionally were 
too time consuming to resolve. They scour databases for hidden 
patterns, finding predictive information that experts may miss 
because it lies outside their expectations. Most companies already 
collect and refine massive quantities of data. Data mining 
techniques can be implemented rapidly on existing software and 
hardware platforms to enhance the value of existing information 
resources, and can be integrated with new products and systems as 
they are brought on-line. When implemented on high performance 
client/server or parallel processing computers, data mining tools 
can analyze massive databases to deliver answers to questions such 
as, "Which clients are most likely to respond to my next 
promotional mailing, and why?" This white paper provides an 
introduction to the basic technologies of data mining. Examples 
of profitable applications illustrate its relevance to today’s 
business environment as well as a basic description of how data 
warehouse architectures can evolve to deliver the value of data 
mining to end users. Data mining techniques are the result of a 
long process of research and product development. This evolution 
began when business data was first stored on computers, continued 
with improvements in data access, and more recently, generated 
technologies that allow users to navigate through their data in 
real time. Data mining takes this evolutionary process beyond 
retrospective data access and navigation to prospective and 
proactive information delivery. Commercial databases are growing 
at unprecedented rates. A recent META Group survey of data 
warehouse projects found that 19% of respondents are beyond the 
50 gigabyte level, while 59% expect to be there by second quarter
of 1996. In some industries, such as retail, these numbers can be
much larger. The accompanying need for improved computational 
engines can now be met in a cost-effective manner with parallel 
multiprocessor computer technology. Data mining algorithms embody
techniques that have existed for at least 10 years, but have only
recently been implemented as mature, reliable, understandable 
tools that consistently outperform older statistical methods.
In the evolution from business data to business information, each
new step has built upon the previous one. For example, dynamic 
data access is critical for drill-through in data navigation 
applications, and the ability to store large databases is 
critical to data mining. From the user’s point of view, the four
steps listed in Table 1 were revolutionary because they allowed 
new business questions to be answered accurately and quickly.The 
core components of data mining technology have been under 
development for decades, in research areas such as statistics, 
artificial intelligence, and machine learning. Today, the maturity
of these techniques, coupled with high-performance relational 
database engines and broad data integration efforts, make these 
technologies practical for current data warehouse environments. 
Data mining derives its name from the similarities between 
searching for valuable business information in a large database 
for example, finding linked products in gigabytes of store scanner
data and mining a mountain for a vein of valuable ore. Both 
processes require either sifting through an immense amount of 
material, or intelligently probing it to find exactly where the 
value resides.  Automated prediction of trends and behaviors. 
Data mining automates the process of finding predictive 
information in large databases. Questions that traditionally 
required extensive hands-on analysis can now be answered directly
from the data quickly. A typical example of a predictive problem 
is targeted marketing. Data mining uses data on past promotional 
mailings to identify the targets most likely to maximize return 
on investment in future mailings. Other predictive problems 
include forecasting bankruptcy and other forms of default, and 
identifying segments of a population likely to respond similarly 
to given events. Data mining tools sweep through databases and 
identify previously hidden patterns in one step. An example of 
pattern discovery is the analysis of retail sales data to identify
seemingly unrelated products that are often purchased together. 
Other pattern discovery problems include detecting fraudulent 
credit card transactions and identifying anomalous data that could
represent data entry keying errors. Data mining techniques can 
yield the benefits of automation on existing software and hardware
platforms, and can be implemented on new systems as existing 
platforms are upgraded and new products developed. When data 
mining tools are implemented on high performance parallel computer System processing
systems, they can analyze massive databases in minutes.
Faster processing means that users can automatically experiment 
with more models to understand complex data. High speed makes it 
practical for users to analyze huge quantities of data. Larger 
databases, in turn, yield improved predictions. Analysts must 
often limit the number of variables they examine when doing 
hands-on analysis due to time constraints. Yet variables that are 
discarded because they seem unimportant may carry information 
about unknown patterns. High performance data mining allows users 
to explore the full depth of a database, without preselecting a 
subset of variables. Larger samples yield lower estimation errors 
and variance, and allow users to make inferences about small but 
important segments of a population.